DOC Updates for symfony/mailer (#92)
silverstripe/developer-docs: en/04_Changelogs/5.0.0.md

- [API changes](#api-changes)
  - [Removed API (by module, alphabetically)](#api-removed)
  - [General changes](#api-general)

>   - [ORM](#api-email)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Email](#api-email)
```

Author: Updated

    - `SilverStripe\ORM\Connect\Query`
  - Removed `SilverStripe\ORM\DataList::getGenerator()` (use `getIterator()` instead)
  - Removed the `SilverStripe\ORM\Map_Iterator` class. `SilverStripe\ORM\Map` now uses a generator instead.
- Removed various API related to SwiftMailer
  - Removed the following classes and interfaces
    - `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Mailer`
    - `SwiftMailer`
    - `SwiftPlugin`
  - Removed the following methods from `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email`, in most instances these have been replaced with equivalent functionality:
    - `addAttachment()`
    - `addAttachmentFromData()`
    - `debug()`
    - `hasPlainPart()`
    - `invalidateBody()`
    - `findPlainPart()`
    - `generatePlainPartFromBody()`
    - `getBCC()`
    - `getCC()`
    - `getFailedRecipients()`
    - `getFrom()`
    - `getReturnPath()`
    - `getSender()`
    - `getSwiftMessage()`
    - `getTo()`
    - `setSwiftMessage()`
    - `setFailedRecipients()`
    - `BaseURL()`

>     - `IsEmail()`

Reviewer: The change mentioned in this comment: https://github.com/silverstripe/developer-docs/pull/92#discussion_r983071152 has not been done yet.

Author: > getTo() replaced with to()
This isn't accurate - to() means setTo()

Silverstripe Email::getTo() used to return an array of strings (I think, possibly a string, or maybe something else),   Silverstripe getTo() has been removed.  Email::getTo() was just a wrapper for SwiftMailer SimpleMimeEntity getTo()

However there is still a getTo() method on Email - Symfony Email::getTo() which returns an array of Symfony Address object

So ... I feel this is really too intricate a thing to put in a changelog.  I think saying "in most instances these have been replaced with equivalent functionality" is good enough here.  Realistically very few projects will be using calling methods like `getTo()` because generally they only care about `setTo()` because they just want to send an email.  Possibly it'll cause some unit tests in projects to fail, but that will be easy to fix.

Looking at this list, only addAttachment() and addAttachmentFromData() are relevant - however these shouldn't even be here as I had already aliased them to the new method names, similar to what I did with the `setTo()` -> `to()` alias - this means less likely to have silent regressions on upgrade

Reviewer: Apologies, I got `get` and `set` mixed up - the `getTo()` method, along with a number of others here, _are not being removed from the class's public API_.  Sure we're not implementing these methods _directly_ in `Email` anymore, but from the developers POV the method is still there. I can still call `$email->getTo()`. Saying we've removed those methods is just going to confuse people, since the methods are still present and callable, and they don't actually have to change anything about how they use them.

For any methods we are keeping (either directly or via inheritance), please remove them from this list.
For any methods are are removing, but which have a replacement (if any) please add "replaced with `theMethod()`" so that developers know what method they should be calling instead.

If any of the methods we're keeping have changed in a substantial way (changed parameters or returned values) please note this in the email section below if you haven't done so already.

Author: Updated

    - `SilverStripe\ORM\Connect\Query`
  - Removed `SilverStripe\ORM\DataList::getGenerator()` (use `getIterator()` instead)
  - Removed the `SilverStripe\ORM\Map_Iterator` class. `SilverStripe\ORM\Map` now uses a generator instead.
- Removed various API related to SwiftMailer
  - Removed the following classes and interfaces
    - `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Mailer`
    - `SwiftMailer`
    - `SwiftPlugin`
  - Removed the following methods from `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email`, in most instances these have been replaced with equivalent functionality:
    - `addAttachment()`
    - `addAttachmentFromData()`
    - `hasPlainPart()`
    - `invalidateBody()`
    - `findPlainPart()`
    - `generatePlainPartFromBody()`
    - `getBCC()`
    - `getCC()`
    - `getFailedRecipients()`
    - `getFrom()`
    - `getReturnPath()`
    - `getSender()`
    - `getSwiftMessage()`
    - `getTo()`
    - `setSwiftMessage()`
    - `setFailedRecipients()`
    - `BaseURL()`

>     - `IsEmail()`

Reviewer: For any of these which do have a new replacement, mention it here.
e.g. "`getTo()` replaced with `to()`"

This makes it a lot easier for people to know what changes they need to make.

  - Changed return types on the following methods in `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email`
    - `send()`
    - `sendPlain()`
  - Changed visibility on the following methods to `private` in `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email`

>     - `mergeConfiguredEmails()`

Reviewer: This section is only for _removed_ API.
Mention these below, in the email-specific section.

Author: Updated

    - `SilverStripe\ORM\Connect\Query`
  - Removed `SilverStripe\ORM\DataList::getGenerator()` (use `getIterator()` instead)
  - Removed the `SilverStripe\ORM\Map_Iterator` class. `SilverStripe\ORM\Map` now uses a generator instead.
- Removed various API related to `SwiftMailer`
  - Removed the following classes and interfaces
    - `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Mailer`
    - `SwiftMailer`

>     - `SwiftPlugin`

Reviewer: If these had namespaces, please put the FQCN here.

Author: Updated

  - Removed the following methods from `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email`
    - Replaced with `Email::getData()`
      - `BaseURL()`
      - `IsEmail()`

>     - Has equivalent functionality via `Email::getTextBody()`

Reviewer: Why is the above "replaced with" but this is "has equivalent functionality via"?
IMO they should all say "replaced with" as that's much clearer language.

Author: Updated

      - `hasPlainPart()`

>       - `findPlainPart()`

Reviewer: We discussed in https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-framework/pull/10517#discussion_r984063507 that these were removed without equivalent functionality - which is what the deprecation messages say.

If you're now saying they _do_ have equivalent functionality, please create a new PR targetting `4` with an updated deprecation message. Otherwise, please indicate these as not having equivalent functionality.

Reviewer: Looking at the code in https://github.com/symfony/mime/blob/6.1/Email.php the docs here are correct, so we need to fix those deprecations.

Author: I've moved `hasPlainPart()` and `findPlainPart()` to under the `Not replaced with equivalent functionality` section.  While they're kind of sort of replaced with `getTextBody()`, it's not really the same thing

    - Has equivalent functionality via `Email::html()`
      - `invalidateBody()`
    - Not replaced with equivalent functionality
      - `debug()`
      - `generatePlainPartFromBody()`
      - `getFailedRecipients()`
      - `getSwiftMessage()`
      - `mergeConfiguredEmails()`

>       - `render()`

Reviewer: This wasn't deprecated in the `4` PR - probably we now need a new PR to deprecate that if it's being removed.

Author: It was? https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-framework/blob/4/src/Control/Email/Email.php#L886

Reviewer: Note this comment was from 12 days ago -  a lot of changes were made since then. :p
You're correct that _now_ it has been deprecated.

- Removed deprecated class `SilverStripe\VersionedAdmin\Controllers\HistoryControllerFactory`

> ### General changes

Reviewer: Why did you remove the anchor?

Author: Reverted

- In CMS 4 the `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email` class subclassed `SilverStripe\View\ViewableData`. In CMS 5 it now subclasses `Symfony\Component\Mime\Email`.
- `MailTransport`, which used the php native `mail()` function, is no longer officially supported in CMS 5. This is because [Symfony considers `mail()` to be insecure](https://github.com/swiftmailer/swiftmailer/issues/866#issuecomment-289291228).
- If your site has a custom email configuration e.g. SMTP configuration, this will need to be updated, as the configuration has changed from Silverstripe yml to a much more flexible and standardised [DSN string](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html#transport-setup). See [the email documentation](/developer_guides/email/) for more details.
- The following API changes also were made:

>   - Changed return types on the following methods in `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Changed return types on the following methods in `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email` which no longer return anything
```
We should include all the pertinent information here - if we don't say it doesn't return anything, we're effectively forcing people to go look at the source code just to know what's changed.

Author: Updated

- `SilverStripe\Core\Extensible::invokeWithExtensions()` and `SilverStripe\Core\Extensible::extend()` now use the splat operator instead of having a concrete number of possible arguments.
- The constructor for `SilverStripe\Versioned\Versioned` now explicitly only accepts mode as a single argument.

### Email {#api-email}

> - Email was sent in CMS 4 using [SwiftMailer](https://swiftmailer.symfony.com/docs/introduction.html), which has since [gone End Of Life](https://symfony.com/blog/the-end-of-swiftmailer). In CMS 5 this has been replaced with [symfony/mailer](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html). `symfony/mailer` is the currently maintained email package from Symfony. It's a more flexible email system that allows easier integration with third-party email providers.

Reviewer: We probably need to mention in here somewhere that `Email` is no longer a subclass of `ViewableData`, so anything people want to use in templates must be returned from `getData()`.

If the `getData()` method isn't mentioned in the main email docs, it also should be mentioned there (probably in the same area that talks about replacing the default template).

Author: I'll add a bullet point to mention the subclass thing. The main email docs already talks about using setData() - https://docs.silverstripe.org/en/4/developer_guides/email/#templates

- `SilverStripe\Core\Extensible::invokeWithExtensions()` and `SilverStripe\Core\Extensible::extend()` now use the splat operator instead of having a concrete number of possible arguments.
- The constructor for `SilverStripe\Versioned\Versioned` now explicitly only accepts mode as a single argument.

### Email {#api-email}

> 

Reviewer: Please add a quick sentence here right near the top that says something completely clear like "The configuration for email has changed completely - please read the updated documentation carefully" (as per https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-framework/pull/10494#discussion_r996567072)

Author: Added

- Email was sent in CMS 4 using [SwiftMailer](https://swiftmailer.symfony.com/docs/introduction.html), which has since [gone End Of Life](https://symfony.com/blog/the-end-of-swiftmailer). In CMS 5 this has been replaced with [symfony/mailer](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html). `symfony/mailer` is the currently maintained email package from Symfony. It's a more flexible email system that allows easier integration with third-party email providers.

> - In CMS 4 the `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email` class subclassed `SilverStripe\View\ViewableData`. In CMS 5 it now subclasses `Symfony\Component\Mime\Email`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In CMS 4 the [Email](api:SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email) class subclassed [ViewableData](api:SilverStripe\View\ViewableData). In CMS 5 it now subclasses `Symfony\Component\Mime\Email`.
```

Reviewer: This has not been done? Along with several other requested changes from the looks of it.

Author: Rather than play peer review ping pong to update every Silverstripe `FQCN` to an api link, I think it'll be far more efficient to simply do this in one big go when we finalize the 5.0.0 changelog prior to releasing 5.0.0.

There's currently loads of other Silverstripe `FQCN` in the changelog unrelated to email that aren't api links

Reviewer: It's not ping pong if you make the change :p But I take your point, I can live with it for now.

- `MailTransport`, which used the php native `mail()` function, is no longer officially supported in CMS 5. This is because [Symfony considers `mail()` to be insecure](https://github.com/swiftmailer/swiftmailer/issues/866#issuecomment-289291228).
- If your site has a custom email configuration e.g. SMTP configuration, this will need to be updated, as the configuration has changed from Silverstripe yml to a much more flexible and standardised [DSN string](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html#transport-setup). See [the email documentation](/developer_guides/email/) for more details.

> - The following return types where changed on the following methods in `SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The following return types where changed on the following methods in [Email](api:SilverStripe\Control\Email\Email)
```

Author: Updated

>   - Used to return a string, now returns an nullable Address object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Used to return a string, now returns an nullable [Address](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html#email-addresses) object
```

Author: Updated

    - `getReturnPath()`
    - `getSender()`

>   - Used to return an array of strings, now returns an array of Address objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Used to return an array of strings, now returns an array of `Address` objects
```

Author: Updated

    - `getFrom()`
    - `getTo()`
    - `getBCC()` - note - changed casing to `getBcc()`
    - `getCC()` - note - changed casing to `getCc()`

>   - Used to return bool, now return void:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Used to return `bool`, now return `void`:
```

Author: Updated

- `SilverStripe\Core\Extensible::invokeWithExtensions()` and `SilverStripe\Core\Extensible::extend()` now use the splat operator instead of having a concrete number of possible arguments.
- The constructor for `SilverStripe\Versioned\Versioned` now explicitly only accepts mode as a single argument.

### Email {#api-email}

> - Email was sent in CMS 4 using [SwiftMailer](https://swiftmailer.symfony.com/docs/introduction.html). In CMS 5 this has been replaced with [symfony/mailer](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html).
> - `symfony/mailer` is the currently maintained email package from Symfony, and it also a more flexible email system that allows easier integration with third-party email providers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Email was sent in CMS 4 using [SwiftMailer](https://swiftmailer.symfony.com/docs/introduction.html), which has since [gone End Of Life](https://symfony.com/blog/the-end-of-swiftmailer). In CMS 5 this has been replaced with [symfony/mailer](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html). `symfony/mailer` is the currently maintained email package from Symfony. It's a more flexible email system that allows easier integration with third-party email providers.
```

Author: Updated

> - Previously in CMS 4 there was official support for both `SendmailTransport` that used the sendmail binary available on most webservers, as well as `MailTransport` which uses the native php function `mail()`.
> - Older Silverstripe project were configured to use `MailTransport` out of the box. This was changed to `SendmailTransport` newer projects created using `silverstripe/installer` `4.9.0` or greater. `MailTransport` was added in a `thirdparty` folder in CMS 4 to retain support after it was officially removed in later versions of `SwiftMailer`.

Reviewer: I don't think this background information is necessary - lets just mention what has changed from 4 to 5 rather than what changed from 4 to another version of 4
```suggestion
```

Author: Remooved

> - MailTransport, which used the php native `mail()` function, is no longer officially supported in CMS 5. This is because Symfony considers `mail()` to be [insecure](https://github.com/swiftmailer/swiftmailer/issues/866#issuecomment-289291228).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `MailTransport`, which used the php native `mail()` function, is no longer officially supported in CMS 5. This is because [Symfony considers `mail()` to be insecure](https://github.com/swiftmailer/swiftmailer/issues/866#issuecomment-289291228).
```

Author: Updated

> - If your site has a custom email configuration e.g. SMTP configuration, this will need to be updated as the configuration has changed from Silverstripe yml to a much more flexible and standardised [DSN string](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html#transport-setup).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If your site has a custom email configuration e.g. SMTP configuration, this will need to be updated, as the configuration has changed from Silverstripe yml to a much more flexible and standardised [DSN string](https://symfony.com/doc/current/mailer.html#transport-setup). See [the email documentation](/developer_guides/email/) for more details.
```

Author: Updated

## Environment variable changes

- `SS_MANIFESTCACHE` can no longer use the now removed symfony/cache 4.x "Simple" cache classes e.g. `Symfony\Component\Cache\Simple\PhpFilesCache`. Instead use the corresponding "Adapter" class e.g. `Symfony\Component\Cache\Adapter\PhpFilesAdapter`.

> - `APP_SMTP_USERNAME` and `APP_SMTP_PASSWORD` no longer have any affect. Use a `MAILER_DSN` environment variable instead to configure SMTP email

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `APP_SMTP_USERNAME` and `APP_SMTP_PASSWORD` have been removed. Use a `MAILER_DSN` environment variable instead to configure SMTP email (see [the email documentation](/developer_guides/email/) for more details).
```
We may as well use stronger language here.

Author: Updated
